// HOW IT WORKS

We ensure community involvement in the design process. We advocate for design innovation. We train and empower architects to support communities. We apply professional advising. We engage our global network of professionals.

Architecture for Humanity is a 501(c)3 non-profit, that has been building a better future through the power of design for the past 15 years.

We provide architecture, planning and project management services including construction management and post-occupancy analysis, and facilitate community engagement throughout each project.

At the core of our mission, we believe everyone deserves access to the benefits of good design.

The Resources
We begin with a need; a community request, a response to disaster, or an existing global issue. Combined with our knowledge and wisdom, we gather support and expertise from a global network of partners and industry leaders.

Collaboration
We work with our clients every step of the way, designing charrettes, community events and consultations. We identify a solution. A commitment to the community's values and vision for their future.

Implementing the Solution
Providing a holistic long-term approach is essential. Training and empowering community members, emphasizing design innovation, providing high-level professional advice, and leveraging our global network of partners are all parts of the solution.

A Lasting Solution
Our goal is a project whos impact on the community spreads beyond itself. Our solutions include igniting hope, catalyzing opportunity, promiting equality, uniting community, empowering children and inspiring growth.

// GET INVOLVED

Donate section
Shop section
Give time (volunteer)

// WORK

Disaster Reconstruction
We are a leader in creating responses to disaster reconstruction that go beyond the “one and done” projects that leave communities vulnerable to future crises. Instead, we focus on creating long-term solutions in partnership with the affected communities.

Biloxi Model Homes
Haiti Rebuilding Center
Happy Hearts
Hurricane Sandy Reconstruction
National Resilience Program
Tohoku Earthquake and Tsunami Rebuilding

/ Mitazono Wakaba Kindergarten • Tohoku Earthquake Tsunami Rebuilding
Mitazono Wakaba Kindergarten has been providing high-quality early-childhood education to families in the town of Natori, Japan for more than 60 years. 

Fortunately, most students and staff had left the school before the building was swept away by the tsunami. Sadly, four students and one teacher were lost to the quake in their own homes. 

As part of the MakiBiz RFP program, we provided the kindergarten with construction funding and architectural and business advice to build back better. Opening its doors in April 2014 to a fresh group of students, this new building provides the kindergarten with a fun space for playing and learning.

/ Maria Auxiliadora School • Happy Hearts Program
The 7.9-magnitude earthquake that struck Calderones, Peru, in 2007 heavily damaged the original Maria Auxiliadora School. The school was forced to partially relocate to temporary classrooms offsite, and half of the campus remained condemned. The only school play space was across a recently paved road near a damaged building that could collapse in another earthquake. 

Architecture for Humanity held multiple workshops with students, teachers and community members in order to assess priorities and ambitions and develop thorough recommendations for reconstruction. The reconstructed school contains innovative spaces and resources for students, including a library, a computer lab, and an outdoor performance space.

/ Kitakami "We Are One" Market and Youth Center • Tohoku Earthquake Tsunami Rebuilding
Located along the jagged Tohoku coastline, the Kitakami community was deeply impacted by the 2011 earthquake and tsunami. Displaced families were moved into temporary housing, and three schools were consolidated into one. Residents lacked access to fresh food, and the local farming industry no longer had a market at which to sell their harvest. 

Community leader Naomi Sato proposed the "We Are One" Market and Youth Center to address the area's post-disaster needs. Completed in January 2013, the center is a true hub for the community, with a robust calendar of events and classes. The market, which provides fresh local produce to the community, now employs four Kitakami mothers - who can easily supervise their children thanks to an adjacent play area.

/ Collège Mixte Le Bon Berger • Haiti Rebuilding Center
Located in the small community of Montrouis, Haiti, Collège Mixte Le Bon Berger teaches 400 students from grades one through twelve 
Architecture for Humanity facilitated the design and construction of the school, employing local contractors and setting construction standards. 

When we visited the school in 2010, structural deficiencies due to faulty construction methods were apparent. Most of the original, unsafe buildings were demolished, and in February 2012, a new eight-classroom building was completed. The building uses sustainable design methods to allow natural ventilation and light into each classroom.

/ Parker House (Biloxi Model Homes) • Biloxi Model Homes Program
Karen Parker was in the process of moving when her home was destroyed by Hurricane Katrina. This unfortunate timing made her ineligible for aid, as she could not prove she was an owner-occupant of the house when Katrina struck. 

As part of the Biloxi Model Homes program, Architecture for Humanity paired the Parker family with architect Brett Zamore and provided design services and financial assistance for the construction of the Parkers' new home. The architect worked closely with Karen to design a house that met the needs of her family of seven. Implementing hurricane-resistant construction, the house draws upon regional building typologies, and sits above flood-hazard levels.

/ Park for All in Kamaishi • Tohoku Earthquake Tsunami Rebuilding
The city of Kamaishi in Iwate became well-known from the story of the "Miracle of Kamaishi." Students of Kamaishi East Junior High School ran from their school to higher ground after the 2011 earthquake, leading students of the neighboring Unosumai Elementary School by holding their hands and encouraging them to stay together. Most of the students survived because they remembered what they were taught during the earthquake and tsunami drill they have each year. KYSIN-no-kai and Architecture for Humanity provided these two schools with hope for their future through a baseball field and community house. 

This project was designed by 2013 Pritzker Architectural Prize winner, Toyo Ito and his staff at Toyo Ito Associates & Architects (TIAA). The clubhouse is equipped with a community room, locker rooms and a storage on the first floor, and an open-air bullpen / a spectator area on the second floor.

/ Sandy Design Help Desk • Hurricane Sandy Reconstruction
Many of those affected by Hurricane Sandy continue to struggle to rebuild their lives. Some remain displaced or live in substandard conditions, while others are stuck mid-repair, having exhausted all insurance funds and personal resources. 

Architecture for Humanity has partnered with community organizations to host a series of Sandy Design Help Desks in affected communities. The Design Help Desk provides residents with free design and technical consultation from industry professionals to aid in the rebuilding process. Consultations include reviewing architectural drawings, creating design options, conveying building code and flood zone information, providing information on recovery programs, and other technical assistance to help build resiliently.

/ Maeami-hama Community House • Tohoku Earthquake Tsunami Rebuilding
In Maeami-hama, a remote fishing village in Japan, 35 out of 40 homes were destroyed by the 2011 tsunami. 

Architecture for Humanity worked with the design firm KMDW and the nine members of the Maeami-hama Reconstruction Project Team to build a community center that would provide a space for events as well as support the fishermen's livelihood. 

For construction, KMDW developed numbered, interlocking plywood pieces accompanied by simple assembly instructions. With these materials, the community team assembled the building over a period of a few weeks, with minimal reliance on skilled builders or complicated equipment.

/ Ohya Green Sports Park • Tohoku Earthquake Tsunami Rebuilding
Following the devastating tsunami, school playgrounds were re-purposed as sites for temporary housing, leaving schoolchildren with limited access to sports. Ryuichi Onodera, a local rice and asparagus farmer and founder of the community's Junior Sports Club, began to dream of donating his idle farmland overlooking a beautiful beach, to build a sports park for the local children. Our design fellow came across him, heard his dream, and the Ohya Green Sports Park project began. 

The project incorporates natural and recycled materials as much as possible. Poles for netting are wooden utility poles. Netting work is executed by former fishermen with metal clips used for fishing, while natural turf for the pitch was placed by the help of FC Ohya members and local community members. Audience seating and signage are designed by a local artist, and built with massive and wildly curved beams of a Japanese traditional house hit by the tsunami. Beams tied together and placed in the center of the park to form unique a seating structure that symbolizes the reunion of the community and a ship for a new start.

Active Spaces
We create engaging community-centered active spaces to support overall well-being by combining community programs and services with the natural human love for sport. Our projects in developed countries address the growing obesity crises, while our projects in undeveloped countries work to address other health concerns.

Enel Cuore Community Empowerment 
Football for Hope
Haiti Rebuilding Center
Happy Hearts
Nike GAMECHANGERS 
Tohoku Earthquake and Tsunami Rebuilding

/ Manica Football for Hope Centre • Football for Hope
The Manica Football for Hope Centre creates a new community space while catalyzing new building industries in the community. 

The Grupo Desportivo de Manica (GDM) was founded in Mozambique with the hope that a public sports organization could encourage social cohesion and reduce poverty. Beginning in 2006, GDM partnered with the Football for Hope program to build a new headquarters. 

The Manica Football for Hope Centre incorporates modern and traditional construction techniques, including traditional compressed earth blocks, which reduce the need for lumber and limit deforestation. The building employs sustainable design methods, incorporating natural air ventilation in its design. The center provides a new space for GDM’s various health, wellness, and learning programs, which are empowering Manicans to live happy, healthy lives.

/ Kimisagara Football for Hope Centre • Football for Hope Program
In a country torn apart by genocide, the award-winning Kimisagara Centre uses football to catalyze social reconciliation. 

The Kigali nonprofit, Esperance unites the Rwandan population through education and social programs, including the program, “Football for Peace and Anti-AIDS.” Following the 1994 genocide, Esperance decided to use football as a tool for reconciliation. Here at this centre, the organization also provides life-skills training and education for Rwandan youth. 

The centre is located in the heart of the Kimisagara valley, the most densely populated and disadvantaged area in central Kigali. The project was completed using passive cooling techniques and locally fired clay brick. Rainwater catchment and filtration provides water for drinking, washing, flushing toilets, and irrigation. Solar-powered LEDs light the field.

/ Mahiga High Rainwater Court • Nike GAMECHANGERS
A multi-purpose, full-size basketball court designed for the St. Joseph Mahiga Primary School and the community of Nyeri, Kenya. 

The structure serves multiple functions for the school, acting as a sports facility, performance space, classroom and dining area. For the community, it provides the area's only community meeting space and hosts their farmer's market. 

The building additionally serves as a major source of fresh water with its rainwater collection system. The metal roof covering the 2,500 sq ft court, collects an estimated 40,000 liters of water per year. This water is funneled to the rainwater storage tanks with an integrated UV purification system that has the capacity to store 25,000 liters of water. In an area without electricity, the building's solar panels provide energy for the water system, as well as night lighting.

/ Manhattan Bridge Skatepark • Nike GAMECHANGERS
Located in New York City's Lower East Side under the Manhattan Bridge, the Manhattan Bridge Skatepark (aka L.E.S. Skatepark) is one of the most heavily trafficked skateparks in the five boroughs. While popular among skateboarders, this park was too neglected to serve anyone else's needs. 

In summer 2012, we gave the skatepark a major facelift. Through a Nike GAMECHANGERS grant, we worked with community skate advocate Steve Rodriguez (5boro Skateboards), California Skateparks, the NYC Department of Parks & Recreation, stakeholders, and community members on a design that has revamped and reramped the existing facility. New dog runs and community areas will soon be enhancing this public space.

/ Park for All in Kamaishi • Tohoku Earthquake Tsunami Rebuilding
The city of Kamaishi in Iwate became well-known from the story of the "Miracle of Kamaishi." Students of Kamaishi East Junior High School ran from their school to higher ground after the 2011 earthquake, leading students of the neighboring Unosumai Elementary School by holding their hands and encouraging them to stay together. Most of the students survived because they remembered what they were taught during the earthquake and tsunami drill they have each year. KYSIN-no-kai and Architecture for Humanity provided these two schools with hope for their future through a baseball field and community house. 

This project was designed by 2013 Pritzker Architectural Prize winner, Toyo Ito and his staff at Toyo Ito Associates & Architects (TIAA). The clubhouse is equipped with a community room, locker rooms and a storage on the first floor, and an open-air bullpen / a spectator area on the second floor.

/ Ohya Green Sports Park • Tohoku Earthquake Tsunami Rebuilding
Following the devastating tsunami, school playgrounds were re-purposed as sites for temporary housing, leaving schoolchildren with limited access to sports. Ryuichi Onodera, a local rice and asparagus farmer and founder of the community's Junior Sports Club, began to dream of donating his idle farmland overlooking a beautiful beach, to build a sports park for the local children. Our design fellow came across him, heard his dream, and the Ohya Green Sports Park project began. 

The project incorporates natural and recycled materials as much as possible. Poles for netting are wooden utility poles. Netting work is executed by former fishermen with metal clips used for fishing, while natural turf for the pitch was placed by the help of FC Ohya members and local community members. Audience seating and signage are designed by a local artist, and built with massive and wildly curved beams of a Japanese traditional house hit by the tsunami. Beams tied together and placed in the center of the park to form unique a seating structure that symbolizes the reunion of the community and a ship for a new start.

Community Resilience
Too many communities are vulnerable to the effects of disasters due to inadequate safety measures in the built environment and a lack of technical understanding. We've learned through our work that many tragedies are preventable. We’re providing the training, technical expertise, and the networks necessary for local architects to provide the leadership necessary to strengthen their communities.

We also advocate for humanitarian design through speaking engagements and events, to continue to lead the conversation in humanitarian architecture and sustainable development

Biloxi Model Homes
Football for Hope
Haiti Rebuilding Center
Hurricane Sandy Reconstruction
National Resilience Program
Tohoku Earthquake and Tsunami Rebuilding

/ Design Like You Give a Damn: LIVE!
Design Like You Give a Damn LIVE! is our one-of-a-kind humanitarian design conference held annually. We organize this event around a particular topic each year, bringing together design experts and enthusiasts from around the world, to address the challenges and lessons learned in their field of work. 

Panel discussions address current humanitarian topics, and small-group workshops allow participants to gain hands-on knowledge from experts in diverse fields associated with design. Design Open Mic provides an opportunity for humanitarian designers to share their work with the public through rapid-pace presentations.

/ AIA / AFH Disaster Grant • National Resiliency Program
In 2012, the American Institute of Architects (AIA) and Architecture for Humanity partnered to coordinate their local members to develop disaster resiliency locally. The AIA/Architecture for Humanity Disaster Response Plan Grant was awarded to five Architecture for Humanity chapters and AIA components in Washington, DC, Seattle, New York, Baltimore, and Chicago. 

The grant winners have exercised leadership through local projects and workshops, initiating partnerships with nonprofits and government agencies, and recruiting teams of architects interested in resilience. These chapters are committed to working in tandem with a vast network of government offices, nonprofits, and professional organizations to build capacity and knowledge in disaster response.

/ Green Schools
We all aspire to build healthy, inspiring and sustainable schools for the next generation. Despite this shared vision, our schools face significant barriers to becoming truly green learning environments. More than ever, outdated school buildings are unhealthy. Budgets are strapped. Educators are too burdened to teach the 'big picture' thinking that students need to live sustainable lives. How can we work together so that every student attends a green school? 

Most designers are eager to help improve school facilities. Yet complicated budgetary issues prevent building improvements from taking place. As a result, our schools and students suffer from chronic underinvestment. We're here to fix that. Architecture for Humanity and its partners are helping schools go green by pairing finance and learning programs with inspired, youth-led design. We're equipping schools to save cash, save the environment, and train the next generation of sustainability 'do-ers'.

/ The APIS Project • Pillars of Sustainable Education
“APIS,” the scientific name for the bee is a tribute to and a call for collaboration. Starting in 2010, university professors, students and Eldorado community leaders and residents have been working together to address post-flood-related issues. For this project, the university will design and build temporary and portable ablution blocks for public use in post-disaster situations. 

Community members have asked for more training and income-generating opportunities following the massive economic losses of recent major storm events. In response, the project team will explore and develop vegetable-based building components made from banana or palm leaves, both of which are readily available in the region. This project aims to train local community members in the production and use of such products, and inspire the development of new products and enterprises.

// OUR TEAM

Meet the people behind the mission.

/ Eric Cesal • Executive Director
• First joined in 2006, joined full time in 2010
• Designer, builder, analyst and writer

/ Veleta Allen • Finance Director, Headquarters
• Leads accounting, finance and operation teams
• Mission is to voice for underserved communities

/ Margie O'Driscoll • Programs Director, Headquarters
• Senior leadership at a variety of nonprofit and governmental organizations
• Serves as Vice President of the Board of Directors of the Association of Architecture Organizations

/ Jason Olson • Operations Director, Headquarters
• Joined in 2010
• Led the search, purchase and transition to headquarters

/ Jean Azor • Accountant, Haiti
• Joined in 2011
• Has more than eight years of experience in his field

/ Brian Baer • Regional Program Manager, New York
• Over 25 years of sustainable, community-aided design solutions
• Currently manages the Hurricane Sandy Reconstruction program

/ Pearl Chen • Design Fellow, Oklahoma
• Is the Design Fellow focusing on Disaster Preparedness Planning & Resiliency
• Has a background in Geography, Architectural Studies, and Urban Planning

/ Diego Collazos • Regional Program Manager, Latin America
• Joined in 2010, focusing on Latin America projects
• Registered architect and development practitioner

/ Nathaniel Corum • Educational Outreach Partner
• Designer, educator and writer
• Plans, designs and builds projects as an educational outreach partner

/ Natalie Desrosiers • Construction Services Director, Haiti
• Joined in 2012
• Born in Haiti, moved abroad to undertake studies

/ Serge Dorval • Mapping and Data Specialist, Haiti
• Joined in 2011
• In 2010 to begin training with the GIS unit of IOM Haiti

/ Jacob Ehrenberg • Brand and Strategy Director, Headquarters
• Joined in 2012
• Spent over a decade managing large-scale, site-specific art installations worldwide

/ Gina Fontes • Communications Consultant
• Joined in 2012
• Experienced in graphic and web design, video production, and blog development and management

/ Sergine Francoeur • Office Manager/Human Resources Coordinator, Haiti
• Has been working as the Office Manager since January 2011
• Moved back to Haiti in 2010 after the earthquake

/ Audrey Galo • Global Program Design Manager, Headquarters
• Joined in 2011
• Passionate about nonprofits dedicated to design, sustainable practices and education

/ Darren Gill • Regional Program Manager, Africa
• Joined in 2010
• Became the Regional Program Manager in mid 2012

/ Libby Hart • Senior Development Manager, Headquarters
• Joined in 2014
• Interested in international community development

/ Sven Kalim • Designer, Haiti
• Joined in 2011
• Worked on various projects in both the Architecture and Planning studios

/ Miku Kano • Business Coordinator, Japan
• Joined in 2013
• Business Coordinator to assist in building back with the power of local communities 

/ Jean-Carmel Laneau • Community Outreach Facilitator
• Joined in 2012
• Helps builds resilient communities throughout his country

/ Delphine Luboz • Program Manager, Headquarters
• Joined in 2011
• Joined as a Design Fellow, later became Program Coordinator for Football for Hope 

/ Jennifer Ly • Donor Services & Event Manager, Headquarters
• Has an academic background in marketing
• Professional experience in development, communications, event planning, education and administration

/ Anna MacDougall • Program Manager, Headquarters
• Joined in 2014
• UK-qualified architect with over 10 years of post-license experience

/ Samuel Merlo • Executive Assistant, Headquarters
• Joined in 2014
• Holds degrees in Political Science and History

/ Jean Moliere • Logistics Coordinator, Haiti
• Joined in 2011
• Studied Accounting in Canada Technique School

/ Jacques Nixon • Associate Engineer, Haiti
• Joined in 2011
• Promoted from Site Supervisor to Associate Engineer

/ Sony Noel • Community Outreach Facilitator, Haiti
• Joined in 2012
• Has a degree in Accounting at the School Commercial Practice Center Accounting IT Management and Secretariat

/ Alix Ogilvie • Program Manager, Headquarters
• Joined in 2010
• Worked for nearly 9 years of private sector work focusing on residential, mixed-use, and adaptive reuse urban in-fill development

/ Yuko Okamura • Creative Content and Branding Manager, Headquarters
• Joined in 2012
• In 2014, transitioned to coordinating the organization's creative content and branding

/ Daphne Saethang • Senior Accountant, Headquarters
• Worked for a tech incubator for 3 years in finance and accounting
• Then pursued Architecture for Humanity

/ Kayoko Sakamoto • Communications Associate, Japan
• Joined in 2014
• Has a professional background in event coordination and promotion

/ Charles Sheppard • Architecture Studio Director, Haiti
• Joined in 2013
• Has over 25 years of experience in design and project management

/ Michael Steiner • Senior Program Manager, Headquarters
• Joined in 2012
• He is a licensed Architect with experience in New Mexico, Oregon and California

/ Tommy Stewart • Regional Program Manager, Haiti
• Joined in 2010
• Registered Architect, LEEDap designer, and Certified Planner with over 35 years in professional practice

/ Hiromi Tabei • Program Manager, Headquarters
• Joined in 2011
• Manages Tohoku Rebuilding Program, and co-manages Typhoon Haiyan Recovery Program and One Burrows Pocket Park project

/ Michelle Tran • Communications Manager, Headquarters
• Public relations specialist with renowned Tech Museum of Innovation in San Jose
• Earned a BA and MA in Communication from San Jose State University

/ Yoichi Wakabayashi • Director of Strategic Partnerships, Japan
• An expert in helping small and medium businesses
• Collaborates with business professionals to aid enterprises in communities affected by the 2011 earthquake and tsunami

/ Mark Warren • Regional Program Manager, Africa
• Joined in 2011
• Started at the organization's headquarters in San Francisco before being relocated to Africa

/ Akinobu Yoshikawa • Senior Design Fellow, Japan
• Joined in 2012
• Initiated his interest in architecture after two major earthquakes in Japan (1995, 2011)z

// BOARD OF DIRECTORS

/ Board Chair
Matt Charney

/ Board Members
Phoebe Campbell
Paul Gabie
Clark Manus
Scott Mattoon
Toshiko Mori
Margaret Gould Stewart
Yutaka Takiura

/ General Counsel
Jenner & Block LLP

/ Past Chairs
Niama Jacobs

/ Past Board Members
Clifford Curry
Niama Jacobs
Taylor Milsal
Narry Singh
Kate Stohr

// PARTNERS AND FUNDERS

Absolut
Alcoa Foundation
AMD
American Institute of Architects
Architectural Digest
ARUP
Autodesk
Barefoot Foundation
Bezos Family Foundation
City of Biloxi
City of Moore
Clif Bar Foundation
Clinton Bush Haiti Fund
Clinton Global Initiative
Curry Stone Design Prize
Curry Stone Foundation
Deutsche Bank
Di Moda Public Relations
Digicel Foundation
Dwell Media
Enel Cuore
Enterprise Community Partners
FEMA
FIFA
Ford Foundation
G-Adventures
Global Giving
Google
Gulf Coast Community Design Studio
Absolut
Alcoa Foundation
AMD
American Institute of Architects
Architectural Digest
ARUP
Autodesk
Barefoot Foundation
Bezos Family Foundation
City of Biloxi
City of Moore
Clif Bar Foundation
Clinton Bush Haiti Fund
Clinton Global Initiative
Curry Stone Design Prize
Curry Stone Foundation
Deutsche Bank
Di Moda Public Relations
Digicel Foundation
Dwell Media
Enel Cuore
Enterprise Community Partners
FEMA
FIFA
Ford Foundation
G-Adventures
Global Giving
Google
Gulf Coast Community Design Studio
Habitat for Humanity
Happy Hearts Fund
Holcim Awards
Hope Coordination Center
HUD
Jolie Pitt Foundation
KaBOOM!
Lincoln
Make It Right Foundation
MTV/Viacom 
New York City Department of Parks & Recreation
Nike, Inc.
NYC Office of Emergency Management
Oprah's Angel Network
Parks Department of the City of New York
Pinsara Federation
Planeterra
Prudential Foundation
Public Architecture
Rockefeller Foundation
Rockefeller Brothers Fund
Stiller Foundation
streetfootballworld
Students Rebuild
The White House
UN Habitat
United States Green Building Council
Warby Parker

// BLOG AND NEWS

/ Brand New Community Center Opens in Roškovce, Slovakia • December 9, 2014
On Tuesday December 9th, the village of Roškovce in Slovakia opened a brand new community center. Connected to the local primary school, the new building hosts a community space, small kitchen and a classroom upstairs. 

This remote village is home to around 500 Roma people, half of whom are children. The majority of adults are unemployed. The small yet vital existing community center was an important place for this community, but it was in such a dilapidated state that it was very difficult for functional use. Thanks to support from Enel Cuore, the local NGO People in Need will now be able to run its health, education and employment programs in a brand new space, and better assist the integration of the Roma community into Slovakian society. 

Once the building was completed, a workshop was held with the children and youth of the community to envision the internal spatial layout and furniture. The group thought about how to use the space in a multitude of different ways. Smaller activity spaces were created with various furniture layouts, podiums and carpets. Most of the furniture was built from scratch by the group of architects who organized the workshop. The final result is a colorful, vibrant and happy place. 

We would like to thank Enel Cuore for making this possible. And deep thanks to local architect, Boris Hochel for designing and managing construction of the building, to People in Need and to the community of Obec Spišsky Hrhov for their additional support. A big congrats to everybody involved in the project.

/ Haiti Program Completion for End of Year • November 4, 2014
“Architecture for Humanity’s work in Haiti highlights the extraordinary heights that can be reached when an international NGO embraces a local community of architects and builders and commits to making life better, instead of just making the papers.  Architecture for Humanity’s five year effort in Haiti represents the sacrifice, goodwill and commitment of thousands – from Haiti and from abroad – to a better future through design.”

-- Eric Cesal, Executive Director, Architecture for Humanity

Today we announce the completion of our Haiti program effective January 2015, marking five years of commitment to help the people of Haiti rebuild their communities and lives.

Since we arrived in Haiti in March 2010, Architecture for Humanity has provided post earthquake design, planning, construction, training and hundreds of jobs for local Haitians. Our Haiti-based team has included architects, urban planners, construction workers, designers, design fellows and hundreds of volunteers.

Over the last five years, Architecture for Humanity has positively affected over 1 million Haitians currently living in Haiti. We completed the construction of and opened 13 school projects, assisting over 18,000 students and their families. Our five years of work in Haiti includes the completion of nearly 50 projects involving hundreds of structures: homes, medical clinics, offices, and schools. We also executed extensive planning and mapping for numerous additional projects and were able to train and employ hundreds of Haitians with proper building techniques.

Even though our organization will no longer have a physical office in Haiti after the new year, we will continue to work with partners locally to provide further consultation and work as needed. We are committed to finishing all of our ongoing work in Haiti on schedule.

We are grateful for all of our wonderful donors, friends, volunteers and partners over the last five years that have made our work possible, and we are proud that our work in Haiti has positively impacted over 1 million Haitians.

"By combining multiple design and construction services under one roof, the Haiti Rebuilding Center acted as a focal point for practitioners. I will always be proud of the work and the people at The Rebuilding Center. The schools we completed proved that Haitian solutions and tradesmen can very effectively produce beautiful learning environments while the community planning projects helped local communities to have their voices heard in the decision making process."

-- Darren Gill, past Haiti Regional Program Manager

/ What's Ahead: Hurricane Sandy Reconstruction • October 29, 2014
Since we started our first year of aid in the Tri-State area, we discovered that as a region, the devastation left by the storm exposed the fragility of our built environment – how prepared or unprepared we were in our properties, our neighborhoods, and our selves. We have seen the large-scale destruction of homes, businesses, streets, and communities. 

More importantly though as we remember today, is that we have moved from recovery to reconstruction.  No longer are we “victims” of Sandy’s wrath. We continue to actively seek opportunities to guide and create a better built environment for those that call this region home.

In the coming months, the Hurricane Sandy Reconstruction program will continue to support and provide resources within our abilities to more property owners, organizations, and municipalities to create sustainable, mitigated, adapted, resilient, and timeless homes, businesses, and communities.  We will continue to explore new and enhance current relationships with like-minded partners to truly make this a place to call home. 

As we look ahead, we also want to celebrate a year of reflection, learning, and progress. We set out to focus on the vulnerable communities and demographics with the greatest need for design and construction services.  Using the power of design to rebuild sustainably and more resiliently, we completed several components of our initial goals:

• Early in 2014, we completed our pilot program of the Sandy Design Help Desk.  Starting in Far Rockaway, Queens, and ending in Red Hook, Brooklyn, we offered free design consultations to a wide variety of property owners.  The consultations offered owners the opportunity to meet with the design professionals that we trained in resilient, sustainable design methodology to provide opportunities to reconstruct their homes and businesses in a responsible manner.

• In late May and early June, our design and construction teams broke ground at Toms River High School North (Toms River, New Jersey) and Washington School (Little Ferry, New Jersey), respectively.  The construction teams progressed through the summer months and, in early September, completed the reconstruction work on time and on budget.

• After this summer’s tourist season ended, we started construction on the sunshade structures on Seaside Heights’ historic boardwalk.  These structures were designed with resilience and timeless thought and are now complete.

• In the spring of this year, we authored and launched our Resilience through Education and Design Centers.  Focusing on assisting small property owners still recovering from the effects of Sandy, the program offers free design consultations through a design clinic where responsible, resilient, and sustainable solutions are offered.  The second phase of the program affords a client to receive pro bono design and construction services in reconstructing their property.

• We have made great strides in identifying and collaborating with new partner organizations, as well as enhancing our existing relationships toward a common goal: to assist the people who live and work around New York City and the Tri-State region to create a more resilient network of communities for generations to come.

• We have identified that there remains a significant need in the region for our services.  Too many people still have difficulty asking the question, “How do I begin to think about rebuilding, let alone do it, and protect my home and family from future storms?”  There are thousands of property owners who still need that question answered. We continue to receive compelling stories from individual property owners seeking sources to reconstruct their homes and businesses.

We have learned much about what we can do and, equally important, what we should not do in the future.  We have seen design competitions present hundreds of incredible ideas that attempt to solve reconstruction challenges in our area in an innovative, resilient, and sustainable manner. We have learned how to help ourselves, how to help our neighbors, communities, and the region.

// CONTACT

/ Twitter
https://twitter.com/ArchForHumanity

/ Facebook
https://www.facebook.com/ArchForHumanity

/ Youtube
https://www.youtube.com/user/ArchForHumanity

/ Instagram
http://instagram.com/archforhumanity

/ Linked In
https://www.linkedin.com/company/architecture-for-humanity?report%2Esuccess=KJ_KkFGTDCfMt-A7wV3Fn9Yvgwr02Kd6AZHGx4bQCDiP6-2rfP2oxyVoEQiPrcAQ7Bf

/ Phone
1 (415) 963-3511

/ Email
info@architectureforhumanity.org
press@architectureforhumanity.org

/ Location
26 O'Farrell St, Suite 310, San Francisco, CA 94108

/ Copyright
©1999-2014 Architecture for Humanity 


